PWA Web Widgets documentation (#2090)
MicrosoftDocs/edge-developer: microsoft-edge/progressive-web-apps-chromium/how-to/widgets.md

---
title: Build PWA-driven Widgets
description: How to build lightweight PWA-driven Widgets that integrate in the operating system widget dashboard.
author: MSEdgeTeam
ms.author: msedgedevrel
ms.topic: conceptual
ms.prod: microsoft-edge
ms.technology: pwa
ms.date: 08/01/2022
---

> # Build PWA-driven Widgets

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Build PWA-driven widgets
```
often each instance is a judgment call per context for natural transparent result

> Native applications can expose information and let users perform tasks via widgets in various operating system's widget dashboards. Examples of this include Android Home Screen Widgets, macOS Dashboard and Today Panel Widgets, the Apple Touch Bar, Samsung Daily Cards, Mini App Widgets, smart watch app companions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Native applications can expose information and let users perform tasks via widgets in various operating systems' widget dashboards. Examples of this include Android Home Screen Widgets, macOS Dashboard and Today Panel Widgets, the Apple Touch Bar, Samsung Daily Cards, Mini App Widgets, smart watch app companions.
```

On Windows 11, Widgets can be displayed from the Taskbar.

![Widgets on Windows 11](../media/windows11-widgets.png) 

Progressive Web Apps (PWAs) can also declare Widgets, update them, and handle user interactions within them.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
![Experimental feature](../../media/2020/06/experimental-tag-14px.msft.png)
```
example of that png in a non-Whatsnew dir:
https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/microsoft-edge/devtools-guide-chromium/inspect-styles/edit-fonts

> > [!NOTE]

Reviewer: possible reworking: convert to h4 serving as a label instead of unstructured note.  Alerts (this tagging) are deprecated:
https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/contribute/markdown-reference#alerts-note-tip-important-caution-warning
- "Avoid notes, tips, and important boxes. Readers tend to skip over them. It's better to put that info directly into the article text."

Often **Note:** simple tagging is better option.  low-key yet gets read.

> > [!NOTE]

Reviewer: Alerts are deprecated: "Avoid notes, tips, and important boxes. Readers tend to skip over them. It's better to put that info directly into the article text."
https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/contribute/markdown-reference#alerts-note-tip-important-caution-warning
Alternatives include:
* h4
* **Note:**
* icon

> > Support for the `widgets` manifest member and associated JavaScript APIs, documented below, is experimental and depends on Microsoft Windows functionality not widely available yet.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Support for the `widgets` manifest member and associated JavaScript APIs, documented below, is experimental and depends on Microsoft Windows functionality that's not widely available yet.
```

<!-- ====================================================================== -->
## Enable Widgets in Microsoft Edge

Widgets are experimentally supported starting with Microsoft Edge 105.

> To test your Widgets PWA code locally, start Microsoft Edge from the command line with the `msWebAppWidgets` feature enable:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To test your Widgets PWA code locally, start Microsoft Edge from the command line with the `msWebAppWidgets` feature enabled:
```

    { "src": "img/icon-128.png", "sizes": "128x128" },
    { "src": "img/icon-256.png", "sizes": "256x256" },
    { "src": "img/icon-512.png", "sizes": "512x512" }
  ],
  "widgets": [
    /* Widget definitions go here */
  ]
}
```

Each entry in the `widgets` array contains several fields, as shown below:

```json
{
  "name": "app",
  "description": "An app that defines widgets",
  "icons": [
    { "src": "img/icon-96.png", "sizes": "96x96" },
    { "src": "img/icon-128.png", "sizes": "128x128" },
    { "src": "img/icon-256.png", "sizes": "256x256" },
    { "src": "img/icon-512.png", "sizes": "512x512" }
  ],
  "widgets": [
    {
      "name": "Agenda",
      "description": "Your day, at a glance",
      "tag": "agenda",
      "template": "agenda",
      "data": "/widgets/data/agenda",
      "type": "application/json",
      "auth": true,
      "update": 900
    }
  ]
}
```

In the above example, an agenda Widget is defined by the PWA. Possible fields are documented below.

| Field | Description | Required |
|:--- |:--- |:--- |
| `name` | The title of the Widget, presented to users. | Yes |
| `tag` | A string used to reference the widget in the PWA Service Worker. | Yes |

> | `template` | The template to use to display the Widget in the operating system. Note that to be installable, a Widget should either declare the name of the template to use with the `template` field, or declare the URL to a custom template using a custom template field (e.g. `ms_ac_template`). See [Choose or define a Widget template](#choose-or-define-a-widget-template) to learn more. | Yes |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `template` | The template to use to display the Widget in the operating system. Note that to be installable, a Widget should either declare the name of the template to use with the `template` field, or specify the URL for a custom template by using a custom template field (such as `ms_ac_template`). See [Choose or define a Widget template](#choose-or-define-a-widget-template). | Yes |
```

| `auth` | A boolean indicating if the Widget requires authentication. | No |
| `update` | The frequency, in seconds, you want the widget to be updated. Note that to actually update the Widget, [Periodic Background Sync](./background-syncs.md#use-the-periodic-background-sync-api-to-regularly-get-fresh-content) is used. | No |
| `actions` | An array of actions exposed to users within the Widget (only if the template supports actions). | No |
| `settings` | An array of settings that can be used to configure different instances of the same Widget differently. | No |
| `short_name` | An alternative short version of the name. | No |
| `description` | A description of what the Widget does. | No |
| `icons` | An array of icons to be used for the Widget. If not present, the manifest `icons` member will be used. | No |
| `backgrounds` | An array of background images that can be used in the template (if the template supports it). | No |

<!-- ====================================================================== -->
## Choose or define a Widget template

**OPEN QUESTIONS: Are generic templates supported at all? Should they be documented?**

> To make Widgets easy to create and adapt to various operating systems, they are displayed with templates. Two types of templates exist:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To make Widgets easy to create and adapt to various operating systems, they are displayed by using templates. Two types of templates exist:
```
https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/style-guide/a-z-word-list-term-collections/u/using-by-using-with

* Generic templates, defined by their names using the `template` field.
* Custom templates, defined by their URLs using a custom template field.

> For the time being, only custom Adaptive Cards templates are supported. Adaptive Cards are an open card exchange format that can be used to exchange UI content in a common and consistent way. To learn more, check the [Adaptive Cards Overview](/adaptive-cards/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the time being, only custom Adaptive Cards templates are supported. Adaptive Cards are an open card exchange format that can be used to exchange UI content in a common and consistent way. See [Adaptive Cards Overview](/adaptive-cards/).
```

To define a custom Adaptive Cards template, use the `ms_ac_template` field:

```json
{
  "name": "Agenda",
  "description": "Your day, at a glance",
  "tag": "agenda",
  "data": "/widgets/data/agenda",
  "type": "application/json",
  "ms_ac_template": "/widgets/template/agenda_template.ac.json"
}
```

The `ms_ac_template` field value should be a valid URL to a template file.

Here is an example of an Adaptive Cards template:

```json
{
  "type": "AdaptiveCard",
  "body": [
    {
      "type": "TextBlock",
      "size": "Medium",
      "text": "Hello ${name}"
    },
    {
      "type": "TextBlock",
      "text": "You have ${meetingNb} meetings today"
    }
  ],
  "$schema": "http://adaptivecards.io/schemas/adaptive-card.json",
  "version": "1.5"
}
```

To learn more, see [Adaptive Cards Templating](/adaptive-cards/templating/).

<!-- ====================================================================== -->
## Bind data to your template

> While the template declares the user interface of a Widget, data is what populates this user interface.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The template declares the user interface of a Widget.  Data then populates this user interface.
```

To bind data to your template, use the `data` field in your Widget definition. This field should be set to a URL that returns valid JSON data.

> The template defined in [the previous section](#choose-or-define-a-widget-template) contains 2 variables: `name` and `meetingNb`, enclosed binding expression syntax: `${}`. So the data returned by the `data` URL in your Widget definition should contain values for these variables.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The template defined in [the previous section](#choose-or-define-a-widget-template) contains 2 variables: `name` and `meetingNb`, enclosed in the binding expression syntax: `${}`. The data that's returned by the `data` URL in your Widget definition should contain values for these variables.
```

  "settings": [
    {
      "label": "Select a calendar",
      "description": "The widget will display the meetings for the selected calendar",
      "type": "select",
      "options": "/widgets/data/calendars",
      "name": "calendarName"
    }
  ]
}
```

It is up to the operating system to provide access, and render, the right setting screen for the Widget, based on the setting definition. 

In the setting definition above, the `label` and `description` fields are presented in the widget setting screen for the user to know what the setting does.

The `type` field instructs the operating system how to render the particular setting. The following types are available:

* Text field types: `text`, `email`, `password`, `number`.
* Date and time types: `date`, `datetime`.
* Selection types: `boolean`, `radio`, `select`, `checkbox`. These types require the `options` field.
* Auto-complete: `autocomplete`. This type requires the `options` field.

Some of the types above require extra information to be rendered correctly. This information is provided by the `options` field. The `options` field can either be an array of values, or a URL that returns an array of values.

> Finally, the `name` field is used in the service worker code to know which setting was change.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, the `name` field is used in the service worker code to know which setting was changed.
```

## Handle Widget setting changes

For simplicity reasons, just like Widget actions are sent to the service worker as a `widgetclick` events (see [Handle Widget actions](#handle-widget-actions)), setting changes are also sent to the service worker as `widgetclick` events.

The `event.action` string can be used in the event handler function to know if the event originated from a Widget action or from a setting change:

```javascript
self.addEventListener('widgetclick', event => {
  const action = event.action;

  switch (action) {
    case "create-meeting":
      // This is a Widget action event.
      break;
    case "widget-save":
      // A Widget setting was changed.
      break;
  }
});
```

As shown in the above code snippet, the `widget-save` event is triggered in the service worker when a particular Widget instance has settings and one of the settings was changed.

See the [Service Worker API reference](#service-worker-api-reference) below for more information about the `widgetclick` event and what information you can access from it.

<!-- ====================================================================== -->
## Access Widget instances at runtime

> Widget instances can be accessed at runtime from your service worker code, which can be useful to update Widgets periodically for instance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Widget instances can be accessed at runtime from your service worker code.  For example, this approach can can be useful for updating Widgets periodically.
```

**TODO: Intro/tutorial.**

<!-- ====================================================================== -->
## Service Worker API reference

**TODO: Widgets are too early in the making for MDN. But there is enough complexity with the APIs that a reference doc is needed. The plan is to document all functions and objects right here in this section. Ultimately this would move to MDN and we'll remove this section.**

The service worker global object (or [ServiceWorkerGlobalScope](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/API/ServiceWorkerGlobalScope)) contains a `widgets` attribute that exposes the following Promise-based methods:

| Method | Description | Parameters | Return value |
|:--- |:--- |:--- |:--- |

> | `getByTag(tag)` | Get a Widget by tag | The Widget tag | A Promise that resolves to the [Widget object](#widget-object) that matches the tag, or undefined.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `getByTag(tag)` | Get a Widget by tag | The Widget tag | A Promise that resolves to the [Widget object](#widget-object) that matches the tag, or undefined. |
```
Global: ending | for each row

> | `getByInstanceId(id)` | Get a Widget by instance id | The Widget instance id | A Promise that resolves to the corresponding [Widget object](#widget-object), or undefined.

Reviewer: Global: change "id" (psychology word) to "ID" except code.

| `getByHostId(id)` | Get Widgets by host id  | The host id | An array of [Widget objects](#widget-object) found in that host.

> | `matchAll(options)` | Get Widgets by matching options | A [WidgetOptions object](#widgetoptions-object) | A Promise that resolves to an array of [Widget objects](#widget-object) that match the options criteria.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `matchAll(options)` | Get Widgets by matching options | A [WidgetOptions object](#widgetoptions-object) | A Promise that resolves to an array of [Widget objects](#widget-object) that match the `options` criteria. |
```
global: ending |

> | `updateByInstanceId(id, payload)` | Update a Widget by instance id  | The instance id, and a [WidgetPayload object](#widgetpayload-object) | A Promise that resolves to undefined or Error.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `updateByInstanceId(id, payload)` | Update a Widget by instance id  | The instance id, and a [WidgetPayload object](#widgetpayload-object) | A Promise that resolves to `undefined` or `Error`.
```
global in page

| `removeByInstanceId(id)` | Remove a Widget by instance id | The instance id | A Promise that resolves to undefined or Error.
| `removeByTag()` | Remove a Widget by tag | The Widget tag | A Promise that resolves to undefined or Error.

### Widget object

Each Widget is represented as a `Widget` object, which contains the following properties:

* `installable`: A Boolean indicating wither the Widget is installable.
* `definition`: A [WidgetDefinition object](#widgetdefinition-object).
* `instances`: An array of [WidgetInstance objects](#widgetinstance-object) representing the current state of each instance of the Widget.

### WidgetOptions object

When using `matchAll(options)` to get multiple Widgets, a `WidgetOptions` object is necessary to filter which Widgets to return. The `WidgetOptions` object contains the following properties, all of which are optional:

* `installable`: A Boolean that indicates if the Widget is considered installable.
* `installed`: A Boolean that indicates if the Widget has been installed in the Widget host.

> * `tag`: The Widget tag.

Reviewer: d/k context but this line seemed esp needing clarification; confusing wording

* `instance`: The Widget instance.
* `host`: The Widget host id.

### WidgetPayload object

> When creating or updating a Widget instance, the service worker must send the data necessary to populate the Widget. This data is called the payload, it includes template- and content-related data and contains the following properties:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When creating or updating a Widget instance, the service worker must send the data that's necessary to populate the Widget. This data is called the payload.  The payload data includes template-related data and content-related data.  The payload data contains the following properties:
```

* `template`: The name of the template to use.

> * `data`: The data, as a String, to use with the Widget template (note that this can be stringified JSON data).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `data`: The data to use with the Widget template, as a `String`.  This data can be stringified JSON data.
```

* `settings`: The settings to use for the Widget instance, if any.

### WidgetInstance object

This object represents a given instance of a Widget in a Widget host and contains the following properties:

* `id`: The internal GUID string used to reference the instance.

> * `host`: An internal pointer to the Widget Host that has installed this instance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `host`: An internal pointer to the Widget host that has installed this instance.
```
match intro sentence

> * `settings`: If the Widget has settings, the key/values pairs set for this instance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `settings`: If the Widget has settings, the key/value pairs set for this instance.
```

> * `updated`: A Date object that represents the last time data was sent to the instance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `updated`: A `Date` object that represents the last time when data was sent to the instance.
```

> * `payload`: A [WidgetPayload object](#widgetpayload-object) that represents the last payload sent to this instance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `payload`: A [WidgetPayload object](#widgetpayload-object) that represents the last payload that was sent to this instance.
```

### WidgetDefinition object

> This object represents the original definition of the Widget, found in the PWA manifest file. The properties of this object match the ones documented in [Define Widgets](#define-widgets).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This object represents the original definition of the Widget, found in the PWA manifest file. The properties of this object match the properties that are documented in [Define Widgets](#define-widgets), above.
```

      "text": "Hello ${name}"
    },
    {
      "type": "TextBlock",
      "text": "You have ${meetingNb} meetings today"
    }
  ],
  "$schema": "http://adaptivecards.io/schemas/adaptive-card.json",
  "version": "1.5"
}
```

To learn more, see [Adaptive Cards Templating](/adaptive-cards/templating/).

<!-- ====================================================================== -->
## Bind data to your template

The template declares the user interface of a Widget.  Data then populates this user interface.

To bind data to your template, use the `data` field in your Widget definition. This field should be set to a URL that returns valid JSON data.

The template defined in [the previous section](#choose-or-define-a-widget-template) contains two variables: `name` and `meetingNb`, which are enclosed in the binding expression syntax: `${}`. The data that's returned by the `data` URL in your Widget definition should contain values for these variables.

Here is an example of what the `data` URL might return: 

```json
{
  "name": "Amelie Garner",
  "meetingNb": 3
}
```

<!-- ====================================================================== -->
## Define Widget actions

> **OPEN QUESTIONS: Are actions supported yet? How do actions from the manifest work with actions from the ac template? Maybe using the data.tag field in the ac action?**

Reviewer 2: Yes, custom `WidgetActions` will be supported. The `WidgetAction.action` maps to an action's `verb`:

```
 "actions": [
        {
          "type": "Action.Execute",
          "title": "Submit",
          "verb": "personalDetailsFormSubmit",
          "fallback": "Action.Submit"
        }
      ]
```

      "size": "Medium",
      "text": "Hello ${name}"
    },
    {
      "type": "TextBlock",
      "text": "You have ${meetingNb} meetings today"
    }
  ],
  "actions": [
    {
      "type": "Action.Execute",
      "title": "Create a new meeting",
      "data": {
        "tag": "create-meeting"
      }
    }
  ],
  "$schema": "http://adaptivecards.io/schemas/adaptive-card.json",
  "version": "1.5"
}
```

<!-- ====================================================================== -->
## Handle Widget actions

Once a user executes an action defined in a Widget, an event is triggered in the PWA's service worker. To handle the user action, listen to the `widgetclick` event in your service worker code:

```javascript
self.addEventListener('widgetclick', event => {
  const action = event.action;

  if (action === "create-meeting") {
    // Application logic code to create a meeting.
  }
});
```

See the [Service Worker API reference](#service-worker-api-reference) below for more information about the `widgetclick` event and what information you can access from it.

<!-- ====================================================================== -->
## Define Widget settings

> **OPEN QUESTIONS: Are settings supported yet? If so, are all types implemented?**

Reviewer 2: Widget settings will not be supported in SV2, but we do plan on supporting them post-SV2

|:--- |:--- |:--- |:--- |
| `getByTag(tag)` | Get a Widget by tag | The Widget tag | A Promise that resolves to the [Widget object](#widget-object) that matches the tag, or `undefined`. |
| `getByInstanceId(id)` | Get a Widget by instance ID | The Widget instance ID | A Promise that resolves to the corresponding [Widget object](#widget-object), or undefined.
| `getByHostId(id)` | Get Widgets by host ID  | The host ID | An array of [Widget objects](#widget-object) found in that host.
| `matchAll(options)` | Get Widgets by matching options | A [WidgetOptions object](#widgetoptions-object) | A Promise that resolves to an array of [Widget objects](#widget-object) that match the `options` criteria. |
| `updateByInstanceId(id, payload)` | Update a Widget by instance ID  | The instance ID, and a [WidgetPayload object](#widgetpayload-object) | A Promise that resolves to `undefined` or `Error`.
| `updateByTag(tag, payload)` | Update a Widget by tag | The Widget tag, and a [WidgetPayload object](#widgetpayload-object) | A Promise that resolves to undefined or Error.
| `removeByInstanceId(id)` | Remove a Widget by instance ID | The instance ID | A Promise that resolves to undefined or Error.

> | `removeByTag()` | Remove a Widget by tag | The Widget tag | A Promise that resolves to undefined or Error.

Reviewer 2: `removeBy*` methods are not supported yet, and may not ever be implemented. 

The Widget Dashboard doesn't support apps removing widgets, and it's unclear if any other Widget hosts will want to allow the app to remove widgets.

### Widget object

Each Widget is represented as a `Widget` object, which contains the following properties:

* `installable`: A Boolean indicating wither the Widget is installable.
* `definition`: A [WidgetDefinition object](#widgetdefinition-object).
* `instances`: An array of [WidgetInstance objects](#widgetinstance-object) representing the current state of each instance of the Widget.

### WidgetOptions object

When using `matchAll(options)` to get multiple Widgets, a `WidgetOptions` object is necessary to filter which Widgets to return. The `WidgetOptions` object contains the following properties, all of which are optional:

* `installable`: A Boolean that indicates if the Widget is considered installable.
* `installed`: A Boolean that indicates if the Widget has been installed in the Widget host.
* `tag`: The tag of the Widget.
* `instance`: The Widget instance.

> * `host`: The Widget host id.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `host`: The Widget host ID.
```

### WidgetPayload object

When creating or updating a Widget instance, the service worker must send the data that's necessary to populate the Widget. This data is called the _payload_.  The payload includes template-related data and content-related data.  The `WidgetPayload` object contains the following properties:

* `template`: The name of the template to use.

> * `data`: The data to use with the Widget template, as a `String`.  This data can be stringified JSON data.

Reviewer 2: Currently, the `WidgetPayload` **only** has `data`. The other two are not yet supported.

Settings will be added post-SV2 when Widget Setting support is available, and it's unclear if/when `template` will be added.

* `settings`: The settings to use for the Widget instance, if any.

### WidgetInstance object

This object represents a given instance of a Widget in a Widget host and contains the following properties:

* `id`: The internal GUID string used to reference the instance.
* `host`: An internal pointer to the Widget host that has installed this instance.

> * `settings`: If the Widget has settings, the key/value pairs that are set for this instance.

Reviewer 2: Settings is not yet supported, but will be supported post-SV2

Various operating systems have widgets dashboards that let users read content and perform tasks. Examples of this include Android Home Screen widgets, macOS Dashboard and Today Panel widgets, the Apple Touch Bar, Samsung Daily Cards, Mini App widgets, and smart watch app companions.

On Windows 11, widgets appear in the widgets board which you open from the left corner of your taskbar:

![The widgets board in Windows 11](../media/windows11-widgets.png) 

In Windows 11, Progressive Web Apps (PWAs) can define widgets, update them, and handle user interactions within them.

<!-- ====================================================================== -->
## Enable widgets in Microsoft Edge

Widgets are experimentally supported for local testing starting with Microsoft Edge 108.

To enable widget support in Microsoft Edge:

1. In Microsoft Edge, go to `edge://flags`.

1. In the **Search flags** text field, type **Web App widgets**.

1. In the **Web App widgets** dropdown menu, select **Enabled**.

1. Click the **Restart** button which appears in the lower right:

   ![Enabling the Web App widgets flag in the edge://flags page](../media/widgets-flag.png)

> Widgets are also available as an origin trial in Microsoft Edge 108. Learn [how to enroll your site in an origin trial](origin-trials.md#enroll-your-site-in-an-origin-trial).

Author: Thanks for the headsup. This documentation doesn't really make sense to publish before the OT is set up, so please let me know when it is, and I'll change this section of the docs to mention both the flag and the OT.

> Widgets are also available as an origin trial in Microsoft Edge 108. Learn [how to enroll your site in an origin trial](origin-trials.md#enroll-your-site-in-an-origin-trial).

Author: I pushed a new commit with a fix for this, please take a look @mandymsft. Let's aim at releasing the docs when the OT is up.

> Widgets are also available as an origin trial in Microsoft Edge 108. Learn [how to enroll your site in an origin trial](origin-trials.md#enroll-your-site-in-an-origin-trial).

Reviewer 3: Thank you @captainbrosset, LGTM. We've requested OT to be set up and I'll let you know when it's available.

> Widgets are also available as an origin trial in Microsoft Edge 108. Learn [how to enroll your site in an origin trial](origin-trials.md#enroll-your-site-in-an-origin-trial).

Reviewer 3: Hey @captainbrosset, OT is set up here: https://developer.microsoft.com/en-us/microsoft-edge/origin-trials/web-app-widgets/registration/
I did some testing with Adolf's app that's registered for OT, and everything works well.

> Widgets are also available as an origin trial in Microsoft Edge 108. Learn [how to enroll your site in an origin trial](origin-trials.md#enroll-your-site-in-an-origin-trial).

Author: I will have a new commit up soon with this information.

        }
      ],
      "icons": [
        {
          "src": "./favicon-16.png",
          "sizes": "16x16"
        }
      ],
      "auth": false,
      "update": 100
    }
  ]
}
```

In the above example, a music player application defines a mini player widget. The required and optional fields of a widget definition in the web app manifest are documented below:

| Field | Description | Required |
|:--- |:--- |:--- |
| `name` | The title of the widget, presented to users. | Yes |
| `short_name` | An alternative short version of the name. | No |
| `description` | A description of what the widget does. | No |
| `icons` | An array of icons to be used for the widget. | Yes |
| `screenshots` | An array of screenshots that show what the widget looks like. Analogous to the [`screenshot` manifest member](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/Manifest/screenshots). | Yes |
| `tag` | A string used to reference the widget in the PWA service worker. | Yes |
| `template` | The template to use to display the widget in the operating system widgets dashboard. Note: although `template` is a required field, its value is currently not used. See `ms_ac_template` below. | Yes |

> | `ms_ac_template` | The URL to the custom Adaptive Cards template to use to display the widget in the operating system widgets dashboard. See [Define a widget template](#define-a-widget-template) below. | Yes |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `ms_ac_template` | The URL of the custom Adaptive Cards template to use to display the widget in the operating system widgets dashboard. See [Define a widget template](#define-a-widget-template) below. | Yes |
```

> | `data` | The URL where the data to fill the template with can be found. For now, this URL is required to return valid JSON. | Yes |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `data` | The URL where the data to fill the template with can be found. This URL is required to return valid JSON. | Yes |
```
Justification: "For now, " is understood globally. Every sentence could say "For now, ", so is unneeded and can leverage terse brevity as might be appropriate for this particular technical doc.
https://developers.google.com/style/timeless-documentation
Avoid needless promising of future functionality throughout regular docs, if that principle applies to the present article.

| `type` | The MIME type for the widget data. Note that it is, for now, required to be `application/json`. | Yes |
| `auth` | A boolean indicating if the widget requires authentication. | No |
| `update` | The frequency, in seconds, at which the widget will be updated. Note that the widget is not updated automatically and you need code in your service worker to do this. See [Access widget instances at runtime](#access-widget-instances-at-runtime). | No |

<!-- ====================================================================== -->
## Define a widget template

To make widgets easy to create and adapt to various operating system widgets dashboards, they are displayed using templates. Two types of templates exist:

* Generic templates, defined by their names using the `template` field.
* Custom templates, defined by their URLs using a custom template field.

For the time being, only custom Adaptive Cards templates are supported. Adaptive Cards is an open card exchange format that can be used to exchange UI content in a common and consistent way. See [Adaptive Cards Overview](/adaptive-cards/).

> To define a custom Adaptive Cards template on Windows 11, use the `ms_ac_template` field in the widget definition that's in your web app manifest. Note that even if `template` is not used at the moment, it is a required field.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To define a custom Adaptive Cards template on Windows 11, use the `ms_ac_template` field in the widget definition that's in your web app manifest. Although `template` is not currently used, it's a required field.
```
"if" is ambiguous/misleading.  'template' is definitely not used.
https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/style-guide/a-z-word-list-term-collections/i/if-vs-whether-vs-when

```json
{
  ...
  "template": "pwamp-template",
  "ms_ac_template": "widgets/mini-player.json",
  ...
}
```

> The `ms_ac_template` field value should be a valid URL to a template file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `ms_ac_template` field value should be a valid URL of a template file.
```

  "body": [
    {
      "type": "TextBlock",
      "size": "Medium",
      "text": "Now playing...",
      "horizontalAlignment": "Center"
    },
    {
      "type": "TextBlock",
      "spacing": "Large",
      "weight": "Bolder",
      "horizontalAlignment": "Center",
      "text": "${song}, by ${artist}",
    }
  ],
  "$schema": "http://adaptivecards.io/schemas/adaptive-card.json",
  "version": "1.5"
}
```

To learn more, see [Adaptive Cards Templating](/adaptive-cards/templating/).

Next, you need to bind data to your template.

<!-- ====================================================================== -->
## Bind data to your template

The template declares the user interface of a widget.  Data then populates this user interface.

To bind data to your template, use the `data` field in your widget definition. This field should be set to a URL that returns valid JSON data.

The template defined in [the previous section](#define-a-widget-template) contains two variables: `song` and `artist`, which are enclosed in the binding expression syntax: `${}`. The data that's returned by the `data` URL in your widget definition should contain values for these variables.

> Here is an example of what the `data` URL might return: 

Reviewer: global 4x: per Acrolinx/[style guide](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/style-guide/word-choice/use-contractions).  case-by-case per tone/judgment.
```suggestion
Here's an example of what the `data` URL might return: 
```

When a widget is installed, it is not automatically rendered using the `ms_ac_template` and `data` fields of the widget definition.

To render the widget, listen to the `widgetclick` event in your service worker, and update the widget by using the `widgets.updateByTag` function:

```javascript
// Listen to the widgetclick event.
self.addEventListener("widgetclick", event => {
  // Only listen to the "widget-install" action.
  if (event.action === "widget-install") {
    // The widget just got installed, render it using renderWidget.
    // Pass the event.widget object to the function.
    event.waitUntil(renderWidget(event.widget));
  }
});

async function renderWidget(widget) {
  // Get the template and data URLs from the widget definition.
  const templateUrl = widget.definition.msAcTemplate;
  const dataUrl = widget.definition.data;

  // Fetch the template text and data.
  const template = await (await fetch(templateUrl)).text();
  const data = await (await fetch(dataUrl)).text();

  // Render the widget with the template and data.
  await self.widgets.updateByTag(widget.definition.tag, {template, data});
}
```

> #### Update widgets on service worker updates

Reviewer 3: Thank you, this looks good :)

> When the service worker code changes in a PWA, the browser detects the change, installs, and then later activates the new service worker.

Reviewer: Installs what?

> When the service worker code changes in a PWA, the browser detects the change, installs, and then later activates the new service worker.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the service worker code changes in a PWA, the browser detects the change, installs the new service worker, and then later activates the new service worker.
```
tech review this change - installs what?  I'm guessing it installs the service worker, not sure.

Author: I changed this in the last commit. Let me know what you think.

> When this happens, it is important to update any widget instances that may already be running. Widgets may have been installed before the service worker `activate` event is emitted. Update your widgets when this event occurs to avoid displaying empty widgets.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When this happens, it is important to update any widget instances that may already be running. Widgets may have been installed before the service worker `activate` event is emitted. To avoid displaying empty widgets, update your widgets when this event occurs.
```
Not sure if this is a case of this anti-pattern, but often phrases need to be flipped, to avoid eg:
Do X, Y, and then Z, if you want to accomplish A.

If keep the present order of phrases, I'd add comma to help reader parse sentence like when reading aloud:
Update your widgets when this event occurs, to avoid displaying empty widgets.

```javascript
// Update the widgets to their initial states
// when the service worker is activated.
self.addEventListener("activate", event => {
  event.waitUntil(updateWidgets());
});

async function updateWidgets() {
  // Get the widget that match the tag defined in the web app manifest.
  const widget = await self.widgets.getByTag("pwamp");
  if (!widget) {
    return;
  }

  // Using the widget definition, get the template and data.
  const template = await (await fetch(widget.definition.msAcTemplate)).text();
  const data = await (await fetch(widget.definition.data)).text();

  // Render the widget with the template and data.
  await self.widgets.updateByTag(widget.definition.tag, {template, data});
}
```

#### Handle widget actions

> If the widget template contains actions, users can execute those actions by clicking buttons in the rendered widget. See [Define widget actions](#define-widget-actions) for information about how to define actions in a template.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the widget template contains actions, users can execute those actions by clicking buttons in the rendered widget. For information about how to define actions in a template, see [Define widget actions](#define-widget-actions).
```

When a user executes a widget action, a `widgetclick` event is triggered in the PWA service worker. To handle the user action, listen to the event:

```javascript
self.addEventListener('widgetclick', (event) => {
  switch (event.action) {
    case 'previous-song':
      // Application logic to play the previous song...
      break;
    case 'next-song':
      // Application logic to play the next song...
      break;
  }
});
```

> For brevity, the actual application code is not shown in the above code snippet. When the `previous-song` or `next-song` actions are received, a message would probably need to be sent to the app using [Client.postMessage](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/API/Client/postMessage) to let the app know that it should start playing the previous or next songs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For brevity, the actual application code isn't shown in the above code snippet. When the `previous-song` or `next-song` actions are received, a message would probably need to be sent to the app using [Client.postMessage](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/API/Client/postMessage) to let the app know that it should start playing the previous or next songs.
```
Acrolinx would probably suggest contraction, per style guide (style guide is mainly about end-user docs not Dev docs).  Sometimes I avoid contraction in API Ref docs for Dev audience where I find that it would change the meaning & weaken communication.  Case-by-case.

Note that the `action` property of the `widgetEvent` object passed to the event listener above matches the string defined in the `action.verb` field of the widget template.

> See the [Service Worker API reference](#service-worker-api-reference) below for more information about the `widgetclick` event and what information you can access from it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more information about the `widgetclick` event and what information you can access from it, see the [Service Worker API reference](#service-worker-api-reference) below.
```

#### Update widgets on application changes

In previous sections, you learnt how to update widgets when specific widget events, widget actions, and service worker updates occurred. It can also be useful to update widgets when something happens in the application, or when a push notification occurs, or periodically.

> In this section, you will learn to use the Periodic Background Sync API to update widgets periodically. For more information about the Periodic Background Sync API, see [Use the Periodic Background Sync API to regularly get fresh content](background-syncs.md#use-the-periodic-background-sync-api-to-regularly-get-fresh-content).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this section, you'll learn to use the Periodic Background Sync API to update widgets periodically. For more information about the Periodic Background Sync API, see [Use the Periodic Background Sync API to regularly get fresh content](background-syncs.md#use-the-periodic-background-sync-api-to-regularly-get-fresh-content).
```
per Acrolinx / corp-level style guide

The PWAmp widget displays the current song and buttons to play the previous or next song.

![Windows widgets board, next to the PWAmp demo app. The widgets board contains the PWAmp mini player widget, showing the current song playing in the PWAmp app](../media/pwamp-widget.png)

<!-- ====================================================================== -->
<!-- widgets are too early in the making for MDN. But there is enough complexity with the APIs that a reference doc is needed.
For now we are documenting all functions and objects in this section. When widgets become standard, move this to MDN and remove the section. -->
## Service Worker API reference

The service worker global object (or [ServiceWorkerGlobalScope](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/API/ServiceWorkerGlobalScope)) contains a `widgets` attribute that exposes the following Promise-based methods:

| Method | Description | Parameters | Return value |
|:--- |:--- |:--- |:--- |
| `getByTag(tag)` | Get a widget by tag | The widget tag | A Promise that resolves to the [widget object](#widget-object) that matches the tag, or `undefined`. |

> | `getByInstanceId(id)` | Get a widget by instance ID | The widget instance ID | A Promise that resolves to the corresponding [widget object](#widget-object), or undefined.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `getByInstanceId(id)` | Get a widget by instance ID | The widget instance ID | A Promise that resolves to the corresponding [widget object](#widget-object), or `undefined`.
```
GLOBAL: check "undefined" and "String" for needing backticks. If not a regular English sentence word, but a word used in code, might need backticks.

| `getByHostId(id)` | Get widgets by host ID  | The host ID | An array of [widget objects](#widget-object) found in that host.
| `matchAll(options)` | Get widgets by matching options | A [widgetOptions object](#widgetoptions-object) | A Promise that resolves to an array of [widget objects](#widget-object) that match the `options` criteria. |
| `updateByInstanceId(id, payload)` | Update a widget by instance ID  | The instance ID, and a [widgetPayload object](#widgetpayload-object) | A Promise that resolves to `undefined` or `Error`.

> | `updateByTag(tag, payload)` | Update a widget by tag | The widget tag, and a [widgetPayload object](#widgetpayload-object) | A Promise that resolves to undefined or Error.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `updateByTag(tag, payload)` | Update a widget by tag | The widget tag, and a [widgetPayload object](#widgetpayload-object) | A Promise that resolves to `undefined` or `Error`.
```
Global: "Error" - consistent use of backticks

The service worker global object also defines the `widgetclick` event that's fired when the widget is interacted with. For more information, see the [widgetEvent object](#widgetevent-object) definition below.

#### widget object

Each widget is represented as a `widget` object, which contains the following properties:

* `installable`: A Boolean indicating wither the widget is installable.
* `definition`: A [widgetDefinition object](#widgetdefinition-object).
* `instances`: An array of [widgetInstance objects](#widgetinstance-object) representing the current state of each instance of the widget.

#### widgetOptions object

When using `matchAll(options)` to get multiple widgets, a `widgetOptions` object is necessary to filter which widgets to return. The `widgetOptions` object contains the following properties, all of which are optional:

* `installable`: A Boolean that indicates if the widget is considered installable.
* `installed`: A Boolean that indicates if the widget has been installed in the widget host.

> * `tag`: The tag of the widget.

Reviewer 3: Some fields above have types specified - boolean, array, etc. Should the tag here and some other ones have their types listed too?

#### widgetInstance object

This object represents a given instance of a widget in a widget host and contains the following properties:

* `id`: The internal GUID string used to reference the instance.
* `host`: An internal pointer to the widget host that has installed this instance.
* `updated`: A `Date` object that represents the last time when data was sent to the instance.
* `payload`: A [widgetPayload object](#widgetpayload-object) that represents the last payload that was sent to this instance.

#### widgetDefinition object

This object represents the original definition of the widget, found in the PWA manifest file. The properties of this object match the properties that are listed in [Define widgets](#define-widgets), above.

#### widgetEvent object

This object is passed as an argument to service worker `widgetclick` event listeners when the widget is interacted with.

The `widgetEvent` object has the following properties:

| Property | Description | Type |
|:--- |:--- |:--- |
| `widget` | The widget instance that triggered the event. | [widgetInstance](#widgetinstance-object) |

> | `action` | The action that triggered the event. One of `widget-install`, `widget-uninstall`, `widget-resume`, or a custom action defined in a `actions.verb` field of the widget template. See [Define widget actions](#define-widget-actions). | String |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `action` | The action that triggered the event. One of `widget-install`, `widget-uninstall`, `widget-resume`, or a custom action defined in a `actions.verb` field of the widget template. See [Define widget actions](#define-widget-actions). | `String` |
```
GLOBAL: check "undefined" and "String" for needing backticks.  If not a regular English sentence word, but a word used in code, might need backticks.

2 more cases below --v

Here is an example of what the `data` URL might return: 

```json
{
  "name": "Amelie Garner",
  "meetingNb": 3
}
```

<!-- ====================================================================== -->
## Define Widget actions

If you want your Widget to let users perform tasks, use the `actions` field in your Widget definition, and define a template that supports actions.

The `actions` field is an array of action definitions. Here is an example:

```json
{
  "name": "Agenda",
  "description": "Your day, at a glance",
  "tag": "agenda",
  "data": "/widgets/data/agenda",
  "type": "application/json",
  "ms_ac_template": "/widgets/template/agenda_template.ac.json",
  "actions": [
    {
      "action": "create-meeting",
      "title": "Create a new meeting"
    }
  ]
}
```

Use the `action` field to give the action a name. This name will be used to handle the action in your service worker. The `title` field is presented to the user.

> To actually trigger the action from the Widget, your template needs to support it. Here is an example of an action defined in a custom Adaptive Cards template:

Reviewer 2: All the widget action content above this line is no longer needed, but this line and everything below are still valid

```json
{
  "type": "AdaptiveCard",
  "body": [
    {
      "type": "TextBlock",
      "size": "Medium",
      "text": "Hello ${name}"
    },
    {
      "type": "TextBlock",
      "text": "You have ${meetingNb} meetings today"
    }
  ],
  "actions": [
    {
      "type": "Action.Execute",
      "title": "Create a new meeting",
      "verb": "create-meeting"
    }
  ],
  "$schema": "http://adaptivecards.io/schemas/adaptive-card.json",
  "version": "1.5"
}
```

> Note that the `verb` action field in the template above maps to the `action` field in the PWA manifest file.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Note that the `verb` action field in the template above maps to the `action` field in the `WidgetEvent`.
```
